ARE STHERE STILL TRACES ?

Catherine Malabou

This talks marks the end of my very rich, intense, so captivating visit to the University of Chicago, made possible by the generosity of Critical Inquiry, and I again want to deeply thank Tom Mitchell, Francoise Meltzer, Frances Ferguson, Hank Scotch , as well as the other members I havn’t met for their invitation.
Today’s lecture will be more general, more concrete also, as what I presented in the two workshops. I would like here to take stock of my philosophical trajectory.
This trajectory, as a whole, has been since the beginning articulated, thematically or indirectly, around the concept of plasticity. Over the years, I have attempted at fashioning and elaborating this notion as both a hermeneutical tool,  enabling me to read through our epoch, and a privileged ontological structure of this epoch itself.
If I have now given up the exclusive analysis of this concept, if I have enlarged my research scope by working on other concepts such as epigenesis for example, I never lost sight of what plasticity since the beginning allowed me to both state and put at work : the end of the paradigm of inscription. 
In order to illustrate this affirmation, I will present and develop two empirical examples that are highly representative of such a phenomenon. This will help me to gradually bring to light my leading question : are there still traces ? 
My two examples are, first, the storage of memory in the brain, second the medical use of regenerative techniques to restore amputated or damaged organs or limbs.
	According to the most recent discoveries in contemporary neurobiology, it appears that no single memory center exists in the brain where complete memories are stored. In their book Memory : From Mind to Molecule, from 1999, Erik Kandell and Larry Squire write : « Memory does not exist in a single site or region of the central nervous system. » A distributed economy of storage  has to be substituted for a single, localizable preservation site. There exist several memory systems,  involving different parts of the brain, mainly the amygdala, the hippocampus, the cerebellum, and the prefrontal cortex. It follows from this that memory itself is fragmented : as we know, scientists distinguish between declarative memory, episodic memory, semantic memory, procedural memory, to name the most well known ones. Usually, the amygdala is involved in fear and traumatic memories. The hippocampus is associated with declarative and episodic memory as well as recognition memory. The cerebellum plays a role in processing procedural memories, such as how to play the piano. The prefrontal cortex appears to be involved in remembering semantic tasks. All these memory systems work together and collaborate in what is now called the « neuronal global working space », but they remain different. Therefore, they can also be dissociated and function independently from each other, as it appears in some brain diseases, very well described by Oliver Sacks notably. Injury to the hippocampus area for example leaves the patient unable to process new declarative memories, and yet, they can still remember information and events that had occurred prior to the wound or surgery.
So, first, several memories and no single place of storage. The second striking fact is that memories are not encoded as images. They do not leave any sign or mark on neural connexions. They modify the forms of these connexions. For a long time, memories were said to imprint the connexions, like a writing on a wax tablet. Such a model is obsolete. The substitution of plasticity for inscription is one of the fundamental shifts in contemporary neurobiology of memory. 
Is such a shift sufficient to challenge the concept of trace ? one will ask. Why should we narrow the phenomenon of the trace to the written sign ? Can’t inscription itself be understood beyond writing ? Can’t there be plastic inscriptions, that is also a plasticity of trace and inscription themselves ?
Let’s have a closer look at how memories are preserved. Eric Kandel has spent  decades working on the synapse, the basic structure of the brain, and its role in controlling the flow of information through neural circuits needed to encode and store memories. Such a control first operates as a selection between memories that will be consolidated and classified long term, and those that will be discriminated as short term. Long term memories as we said are not stored in just one part of the brain, but are widely distributed and are preserved throughout the brain as groups of neurons that are primed to fire together in the same pattern that created the original experience. Repeated activity by neurons, repeated firings leads to a modification in size, volume and volume of the connections. Connections are said to be potentialized when frequently sollicitated, and depressed when seldomly.  These modifications are made possible by neurotransmitters that allow communication among neurons and whose action is critical for developing new memories. Repeated activity by neurons leads to increased neurotransmitters in the synapses and more efficient and more synaptic connections. This is how memory consolidation occurs. Again, we then can see how the economy of form takes over that of the imprinted text. Memories do not write anywhere.
Again, why should such a substitution challenge or impact the concept of trace ? There is absolutely no reason why we should reduce the trace to an inscription, and the inscription itself to a graphic mark. At this point of course, we encounter, remember or rediscover Derrida’s grammatological lesson, according to which the science of writing, that is grammatology itself, forbids the reduction of the trace to any graphic model. When Derrida asks, What would a trace be, that would not let itself erase, or obliterate ? He also means what would a trace be, that would reduce its own meaning to a certain type of trace, the graphic one ? such a reduction would foster a type of essentialism of the trace. “The (pure) trace is difference. It does not depend on any sensible plentitude, audible or visible, phonic or graphic. » (Derrida 62) Besides, we should not forget this other declaration from Of Grammatology, according to which, as Derrida says, « Difference is the being-imprinted of the imprint”, and «  therefore the formation of form ». (Derrida 63). So again, a trace can be plastic.
Writing itself, Derrida pursues,  should not be reduced to writing, that is to the use of letters in order to compose a sentence or a text. Writing can also mean,  I quote « to scratch, to engrave, to scribble, to scrape, to incise » (123) But the main problem here appears, which is that to scratch, to scribble, to scrape, are still graphic gestures, they all pertain to inscription, to gestures that tend to break a path 107, as Derrida says, through matter, be it a sheet of paper, a piece of wax, a rock or a wild forest. I would like to affirm here that one of the major issue of deconstruction is that while announcing the irreducibility of the trace to any determined material modality, it has never been able to extend the trace beyond the paradigm of inscription. Plasticity, in Derrida, remains overpowered by writing, and only appears as its shadow. Erasure, Derrida affirms, belongs to the trace. But there is a dramatic difference, an incompatibility perhaps, between disappearing and changing form. The formation of form is not the simple flip side of the being imprinted of the imprint, it designates a different economy that that of the imprint. And this is what grammatology never accounted for.
Let’s go back to the brain. One might objecta t that point that scientists still use the term « engram » to designate the outcome of the process of consolidation of a memory. And the term engram still belongs to the inscription lexikon. Nevertheless, if we look at the neurobiological definition of the engram, we find a very puzzling paradox. I read from an article : « An engram is a hypothetical biophysical or biochemical change in the neurons of the brain, hypothetical in the respect that no-one has ever actually seen, or even proved the existence of, such a construct. » Inscription does not happen. It is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to isolate a particular memory in the innumerable neural networks at  work in the global neural work space. But more specfically and interestingly, the three processes of memory encoding, storage and retrieval are not operated by the same networks, which means that memories are transformed at each stage. In the end, the one stored and the one retrieved are always unfaithful to the original. Two meanings at least of « changing form » are at work in the plasticity  model : first the change of aspect of the connection, second, the change of content of a memory. And we know now that all memories change form. So again, it is not only a matter of disappearing, of getting erased, of course the possibility of forgetfulness is always there, and active, it is a matter of disguise, transvestment, of  alternative facts. I am not referring to this notion humorously only. I do believe that our era of « postruth » is linked with the disappearance of inscription. 
In an article recently published in Mere Orthodoxy (March, 31, 2016) called «  Blame Derrida for Donald Trump », the author, S.D. Kealy, writes : « The world is no longer logocentric, words no longer mean anything, and this is not Trump’s fault. Trump is not to be held solely responsible for the fact that, when he is front of a crowd, or in a debate, or in an interview, telling it like it is, there is no longer an is. Our politicians make a practice of speaking words into the void and seeing what happens next. If the madness that follows the political rhetoric at a rally demonstrates the dismantling of society itself, don’t blame the practitioners. Blame the theoreticians for a change. Blame Derrida. » I don’t agree with this conclusion at all, Trump is not a deconstructionist, or a product of deconstruction, because contrarily to what this person tends to think, deconstruction has faith in the trace, deconstruction has faith in the inscription. It is when there are no traces anymore that post-truth can start. Postruth belongs to the plastic, not the graphic era. 
The paradigm of inscription is highly dependent upon the Freudian category of Bahnung, facilitation, as presented in the Project For A Scientific Psychology. In this text, we find the idea of facilitation, Bahnung, that designates the opening of a path, a breach that renders a passage easier. Memories first have to open a path in the brain, and this will facilitate the repetition of the memory, that is its retrieval. There are two kinds of neurons according to Freud : the permeable neurons (phi), which offer a resistance and thus retain no trace of impression (…) ; and other neurons (psy), which would oppose contact-barriers to the quantity of excitation, and would thus retained the printed trace ( Derrida, Freud and the Scene of Writing, 201). » These printed traces themselves can be rearranged, reinscribed elsewhere. This is the palimpsest principle, so important in the definition of the unconscious.
In a letter to Fliess, Freud writes : «  As you know, I am working on the assumption that our psychic mechanism has come into being  (…). The material present in the form of memory-traces is subjected from time to time to a rearrangement in accordance with fresh circumstances to a retranscription. » (206) Such a transvestment, a displacement, do not impact the fact that memories, differently inscribed in different layers of the system, constitute an archive. Reinscription in Freud is the very condition of possibility of the archive. We know now not only that there are no neurons « psy », but also that neuronal networks do not form a palimspsest or a Wunderblock, a mystic writing pad.
In the brain, there are no layers. Neural materiality does not obey the archeological principle.

It is of course impossible to leave this point without evoking the possibility of inaccurate and false Memories. Not only our memories are fragile, alterable, changeable, they can also be false. False memories are recollections that feel real but are not based on actual experience. The great specialist Elizabeth Loftus says we need independent evidence to corroborate your memories. According to her: “The one take home message that I have tried to convey in my writings, and classes, (…) is this: Just because someone tells you something with a lot of confidence and detail and emotion, it doesn't mean it actually happened. You need independent corroboration to know whether you're dealing with an authentic memory, or something that is a product of some other process.”
We not only distort memories for events that we have witnessed, we may also have completely false memories for events that never occurred at all. Such false memories are particularly likely to arise in certain contexts, such as (unintentionally) through the use of certain dubious psychotherapeutic techniques or (intentionally) in psychology experiments. There is currently no way to distinguish, in the absence of independent evidence, whether a particular memory is true or false. Even memories which are detailed and vivid and held with 100 percent conviction can be completely false. And there is no convincing evidence to support the existence of the psychoanalytic concept of repression either, that would help explain the emergence of false, disguised or distorted memories.  Memory, to summarize, is highly malleable, to such a degree that it renders interpretation impossible. Because it renders inscription impossible.
Let me now turn to the second example, that of regenerative medicine. It makes manifest that the process of scarring, which is at the same time both a marking and an erasure of the wound, and also pertains for that reason to the register of the trace, tends to be replaced by another therapeutic modality, , precisely by regeneration.
My research on plasticity led me to an interest in “regenerative” medicine, which develops a set of auto-repairing or self-regenerating techniques for organs and tissues. This type of medicine takes advantage of the astounding possibilities of stem cells. Scientists are working on totipotent embryonic stem cells which differentiate themselves to give birth to all of the types of cells in an organism, as well as on adult, non-specialized stem cells found in specialized tissues (the brain, bone marrow, blood, blood vessels, the retina, liver…). During renewal most of these cells generate ones that are similar to the cells of the tissue from which they come. But scientists have discovered that some of them (notably skin stem cells) can transform into other types of cells (nerve or muscle cells, for instance). This is called “trans-differentiating.” Starting with these cells it is therefore possible to manufacture skin, muscle, neurons, to regenerate the sick organ without the aid of outside intervention. 
The type of medicine using stem is called regenerative medicine because of the ability of certain animals to re-engender one or several damaged or amputated body parts. The salamander is the most well-known and spectacular example for it can regenerate members (limb, tail) and portions of organs, such as the eye or heart. Through the use of stem cells, regenerative medicine today tends to rediscover this self-repairing faculty inscribed in the memory of species. It is increasingly common to use regeneration in the treatment of burns for example, or Parkinson’s disease… 
With humans, as with all mammals, regeneration is practically extinct. Only a few rare instances of the regenerative capacities of the salamander or the hydra persist: the epidermis and blood vessels tend to reconstitute themselves only when they are damaged; in some instances the liver can self-regenerate; the last phalanx can grow back on children and adolescents. But these possibilities are extremely limited and appear to be the vestiges of an immemorial past. 
Why did regeneration die out? This is an interesting point: it seems that in the course of evolution scarring replaced regeneration. In higher order animals, it is less advantageous to leave a wound open for a long period than for it to scar over. Apparently evolution pushed aside regeneration among superior animals because it takes longer than scarring and represents a less advantageous and less costly factor of adaptation. Scaring is thus a tardy mode of healing in the history of species.
Clearly the scar is a physical obstacle to regeneration since it forms a crust or fibrous shell that prevents the reconstitution of the member or damaged organ. 
What happens if the limb of a salamander is cut off? The epidermic cells migrate rapidly to the surface of the stump and cover it over entirely with a sort of envelope. When the amputated surface is totally re-covered a second phase, known as “de-differentiation” begins. Under this envelope, the stem cells that had differentiated themselves into nervous, muscular or vascular cells lose their specialization. They dedifferentiate themselves and form a type of bud, the regenerative blastema, from which, through a process of trans-differentiation, they regenerate the entire amputated structure. No scar is formed. The wound heals and leaves no scar behind. Among mammals, on the other hand, this blastema does not form; in its place appears a scar. 
Today regenerative medicine is based essentially on the possibility of reactivating these lost functions, which implies inhibiting the scaring process. This inhibition or erasure is possible in two ways: through the activation of the dedifferentiation and trans-differentiation of stem cells (therapeutic cloning) and through the neutralization of scarring genes (a function of gene therapy). 
First, the disappearance linked to natural regeneration: the limb or tissue reconstitutes itself, there is no scar, the mark of the wound is erased. Second, the disappearance of the scarring process itself, a disappearance provoked by medical technique. It is a matter of erasing the mark that obliterates a very ancient process of erasing the mark. 
The salamander reminds us, in fact, that regeneration is a de-programming, an “un-writing”. Regenerative medicine proves the outdated nature of a belief that was held until very recently, namely, the irreversibility of cellular differentiation and genetic programming. Today biologists precisely use the concept of plasticity to refer to the ability of cells to modify their program, to change their text. Plasticity definitely designates the resistance of the form to its graphic reduction. 
I was mentionning the phenomenon of false memories, I could also mention that of the trauma erasing molecules. Neuroscientific research on the removal of unpleasant and traumatic memories is at a very early stage, although in recent years there has been significant progress in the understanding of the mechanisms of memory and its possible alterations. The main purpose of such practices is to give relief to those who have experienced or witnessed negative events (accidents, assaults, natural disasters, terrorist attacks) which caused serious psychological consequences and, in severe cases, even led to post-traumatic stress disorder. 
In that case also, erasure isn’t simply the erasure of a trace, it is not like wiping a board. The different processes involved in this erasing operation all pertain to plasticity to the extent that they act on neural connections and neurotransmitters. When a protein synthesis inhibitor is given after retrieval, molecular and cellular mechanisms of reconsolidation are disrupted and long-term memories are significantly impaired on subsequent tests. Although that technique has only been used in animal models, it may be feasible for use in humans. “Theoretically, a neurosurgeon declares, patients could be brought into a clinical setting, presented with a stimulus that retrieves the fearful stimulus and given a drug, and the fear memory would be weakened”. A reorganization of neural networks follow from this, and the neural architecture takes on a new form.
The paradigm of inscription has never been challenged in the whole history of philosophy, including its in its deconstructive phase. What Heideggerian Destrucktion first, then Derrida’s deconstruction have touched is an order, an order of succession. The traditional determination of truth as inscription of the idea in the soul coincided, in the metaphysical tradition,  with an elaboration of the trace as a result, the consequence of a passage, as we can see in Aristotle’s De Anima for example. First the act of imprinting, then the appearance of the trace. Destruction and deconstruction of metaphysics start with a concept a trace that would on the contrary come first and be prior to what paradoxically causes it. The trace, understood in that sense, would always be originary. Such is the meaning of the Aufriss, opening trait in Heideggger, the ontlogical passivity of the grapheme in Derrida, or of the Other as passage in Levinas. The past to which the trace refers is a past that never happened, a past that was never present. Yet, it remains a trace, even under erasure. The inscription model remains pregnant, allowing the eternal recurrence of history, interpretation, reading, infinite conversation. Even when Deleuze opposes psychoanalysis in A Thousand Plateaus, he still does it in the name of the trace, contrasting Feud’s psychic imprint with the multitude of animal traces scattered in the snow. Trace vs trace, text vs text, reading vs reading. But trace still.
What is striking in my examples is the resistance they precisely oppose to hermeneutics. Plasticity renders the trace illegible. Such is a major reason why, for example, psychoanalysts nowadays resist the idea of a cerebral unconscious. Such an unconscious dismisses all attempts at interpreting it. Experience plastically sculpts or fashions the brain and yet, it does not inscribe it.
Plasticity allows me to raise two issues at the same time. The first one, again, is a paradigm shift. The second is an ontological problem. Plasticity does not only designates a new modality of memorization or healing, it also characterizes the way in which the subject is excluded from these modalities themselves. Because of the way in which the brain and regeneration function, the possibility for a subject, be it individual or collective, to appropriate or reappropriate their own wounds or traumas, to constitute and read their own archive, finds itself profoundly and definitely challenged. 
At this point, and to bring my presentation to a close, I would like to bring together the conclusions of the three presentations I gave here this week.
Last Monday, I adressed the issue of the void as raised by speculative realism.
The success of speculative realism can be partly explained by the current demise of inscription. I just analyzed the inaccuracy of the concept of inscription when it comes to the brain or the body in general. Contemporary realists also and rightly affirm, on the objective side this time, the impossibility of inscribing the world. The « real » is precisely what resists the human attempts at leaving traces in or on it. The ecological crisis renders such an incompatibility manifests, as it shows the deep incompatiblity between the earth and « our » traces on the earth, the catasrophe of our « imprints ». The earth, the world in general, the realists declare, are perfectly indifferent to the possibility of being thought, remembered, deciphered, read or interpreted. The becoming obsolete of the trace opens a desertic ontology, a void, that can be characterizes, on both sides, subjective and objective,  as a space of non-response. The world does not respond us as we thought it did through traces, that is artefacts, the subject does not respond to itslef as we thought it did through traces, that is through memories and history. Traumas, wounds, scars would just be formed and reformed in a continuous fluidity without leaving any trace anywhere. On the other side, we would have “a world where humanity is absent; a world crammed with things and events that are not the correlate to any manifestation” (26). The demise of the trace then opens a space of non response, as I said, or of absolute secrecy, or also of absolute transparence.
This very briefly brings back to the brain. The cognitivist philosopher Thomas Metzinger, in his book Being No One,  analyzes what he calls neural transparency. The brain he says is a transparent self model, and subjectivity, the feeling of the self, of being someone,  is only a delusional effect of neural transparency. “What in philosophy of mind is called the ‘phenomenal self’ and what in scientific or folk-psychological contexts frequently is simply refered to as ‘the self’ is the content of a phenomenally transparent self model.” (331)
The self is a window through which we see but which is itself invisible — while never seing the glass of the window itself. 
“Nobody ever was or had a self. (…) The phenomenal self is not a thing, but a process — and the subjective experience of being someone emerges if a conscious information-processing stystem operates under a transparent self-model. (…) This model is transparent : you look right through it. You don’t see it. But you see with it. (…) You constantly confuse yourself with the content of the self-model currently activated by your brain.” (Being No One, 99). In this sense,  “Transparency is a special form of darkness.” (Ibid.
169).

We can enlarge this notion of transparence to the non response of the world, of the real. The non response, the secret, don’t hide themselves, they are heterogeneous to the hidden, the obscure, the invisible. The secret is that there is no secret, end of the paradigm of inscription coincides with the end of the paradigm of  the crypt, of cryptic meaning or messages in particular.
This brings me to epigenesis and what I developped in the second workshop last  Wednesday. In conclusion of my whole presentation, we can say that we are confronted to the following alternative. Either we state, as contemporary realists  do, that the erasure of all traces means that everything is radically contingent. That nothing is inscribed, not even laws, not even rules, consequently, that truth itself is aleatory. I tried to show the danger of scuh a conclusion the other day.
Or, we affirm that building a new structure of responsibility, thanks to the concept of plasticity, is possible. A responsibility for the non response. If subjectivity is just a window through which we see, if there is no possibility for us to turn on ourselves and decipher with certainty the traces of our own memories, if the world itself has become transparent in its rejection of our inscription, if there is no ground, no ground for the secret, then we have to remain at the surface. At the epicentre, in the middle, the crossing point between the ground and the sky, with the task of producing an understanding of the impossibility to refer to any origin or even trace of the origin.  Such an understanding would constitute this plastic responsibility, the capacity to respond to the absence of any preliminary question, to witness in the absence of witnesses. To go on reading and writing when there are no texts anyore, no books even, nothing to read, but still so much to say.








