Is Science the Subject of Philosophy? Miller, Badiou and Derrida Respond

Catherine Malabou 

Translated by William Samson


I wish to make you aware of two reading experiences I have had. The first is that of reading Alain Badiou’s 1969 text, published in Cahiers pour l’analyse, titled “Mark and Lack,” where we can find the affirmation that gave rise to my title: “Science is the subject of philosophy.” This essay is a response to Jacques-Alain Miller’s “Suture: Elements of the Logic of the Signifier,” published a few years prior to Badiou’s essay in the same journal. Despite their specific and very dated context—their questions about science had to confront, in that time, both psychoanalysis and Marxism—they contain very important elements for thinking the relations between science and philosophy today, and they have import that, in my opinion, goes well beyond their time.
	The second discovery is altogether different. While, for other reasons, I was recently rereading Derrida’s “Passions: An Oblique Offering,” I was struck by the coincidence—if not the similarity—of the analyses developed in that book with those developed by Badiou about the situation of philosophy. The word “situation” is being taken here in its proper sense, as venue, place, and orientation, all at the same time. This coincidence is more surprising given that the two thinkers have little in common with each other, as is attested to by the extreme difference in the points of departure of their respective discourses. Badiou undertakes the analysis of the relations between philosophy and mathematical logic, while Derrida concerns himself with the relations between philosophy and literature. Despite it all, their conclusions strangely and mutually echo each other.
	In both cases, what I will call the law of the fault of philosophy emerges. For both thinkers, philosophy is in need of an answer. It wants to answer for everything, even, which is the problem, for that which does not respond. What does not respond, for Badiou, is science. For Derrida, literature. Examining these two types of non-responses more closely will constitute my subject, which is precisely the question of the subject. There is no subject of science, says Badiou; there is no subject of literature, says Derrida. This double absence of subject constitutes precisely, for them, the subject of philosophy, which is supposed to respond in their place by wrongly characterising this absence as a lack. A lack which it is possible not to fill, but at least to make speak.
*
Miller undertakes to show that science, and in particular mathematical logic, proceeds from a denial of lack, and sutures closed all that could leave the place of the other of science (which is to say, the subject function) empty. By definition, science is “objective” and admits no lacuna or void, no desire nor gap. This constitutes the “suture” or foreclosure that Miller, with the help of Lacan, intends to deconstruct. To this end, Miller begins with a reading of Frege’s The Foundations of Arithmetic, where he defends the idea that zero, in mathematics, is precisely not a void or a lack.
	In The Foundations of Arithmetic, Frege defines number. A number refers to no particular thing. It does, however, have an object. What is the difference between a thing—that empirical X—and an object? The difference between four balls as things and what the number 4 measures? What do things become once they are numbered and numerable, in other words? They become units. Because of this, they obey particular syntactic determinations, which are ordered by a fundamental rule or structure, which Frege outlines in the following way: Numbers are extensions of concepts. The number 4, for example, is the extension of the concept ‘four’. The two are equinumerical. “The number which belongs to the concept F,” says Frege, “is the extension of the concept ‘equinumerical to the concept F.’”
	What does “concept” mean here? ‘Concept’ signifies self-identity. Saying that a number is an extension of a concept signifies that a number is identical to its concept, that it is identical to itself. In other words, as Miller rightly says, all numbers presuppose “the concept of identity to a concept.” This rule of identity to a concept is valid for all numbers. “The concept of identity to a concept” works for every number. This is the rule of unity: being self-identical means to “be one.” There is thus some “one” in all numbers. “This one [that of the singular unit] [...] is common to all numbers in so far as they are first constituted as units.”
	The object is the thing become one (self-identical), and thus numberable. “That definition, pivotal to his concept,” continues Miller, “is one that Frege borrows from Leibniz. It is contained in this statement: eadem sunt quorum unum potest substitui alteri salva veritate. Those things are identical of which one can be substituted for the other salva veritate without loss of truth.” Numbers are substitutable for one another insofar as in them, at any time, the self-identical repeats itself, i.e., the “one” of the unit. We can thus “pass” from one number to another without losing truth, since identity is preserved.
But the problem then arises of knowing how one “progresses” from one number to another. How the number can “pass from the repetition of the 1 of the identical to its ordered succession: 1, 2,3, 4, 5 ?” The answer: For that to occur, “the zero has to appear.” And Miller here makes reference to the very influential Fregian analysis of zero.
Why is the “engendering of the zero” necessary for Frege? At this point, we’ve posited the self-identity of the concept of number, and thus of the number itself. That’s to say that “non-identity with itself is contradictory to the very dimension of truth.” How then to designate non-identity? “To its concept, we assign the zero,” says Miller, reading Frege. Nothing falls under the concept ‘non-identical with itself’ if not, Miller continues, a void or a gap. Zero is the name of that nothing. Yet Frege nonetheless defines zero as a number, to which he assigns the cardinal 1. This is where the “suture” comes from, from that eclipse of the zero by the one.
The non-self-identical answers fully, for Frege, to the principle by which, for any object, it must be possible to say under what concept it must be subsumed. Yet zero can be subsumed under the concept of non-self-identity as “identical to zero.” Thus zero is identical to its concept, the concept of non-self-identity. Let there be a concept “identical to zero.” One and only one object, zero, is subsumed under that concept. “One” is thus by definition the cardinal number that belongs to that concept. Zero is “one” in the sense of self-identity. Now, in trying to make the number 1 appear, it must be shown that something can immediately follow zero in the series of natural numbers. “Zero,” Miller says, following Frege, “is the number assigned to the non-self-identical. This number is 1 [marked zero]. It follows that 1 follows immediately from 0 in the series of natural numbers.” And from there we can deduce the set of numbers, following the structure of “following from,” with the restriction that no number can follow itself in the natural series of numbers beginning with zero. Inscribing zero as a point of departure for the series of numbers makes it possible that the rule n+1:0 (self-identity of the concept “not identical to itself”) is followed by 1, which itself is followed by 2, then by 3, and so on.
Examining the Fregean argument on the subject of zero, Miller concludes that the zero is at the same time summoned and dismissed. “That which in the real is pure and simple absence finds itself through the fact of number (through the instance of truth) noted 0 and counted for 1.” The word “suture” signifies: 1) the uniting, by use of thread, of divided parts after an accident or surgical intervention; 2) the immobile articulation characterized by two jointed surfaces united by fibrous tissue, like those which from the cranium, the apparent line constituting the conjunction of two parts. The suture is thus always at the same time a division and conjunction. In every case, the seam, the conjunction, remains visible.
What is really sutured in Frege’s discourse in particular, and in formal scientific language in particular? Miller responds: the subject-function. “To designate it I choose the name of suture. Suture names the relation of the subject to the chain of its discourse” The appearance-disappearance of the zero in the series of numbers figures the appearance-disappearance of the subject in the chain of its discourse.
Frege affirms, however, multiple times, that logic does not follow from a subjective act, which is always, for Frege, psychological. Yet it is precisely this which appears to Miller as a denial. According to Frege, the subject counts for nothing. From this, it follows that suturing the zero can be read as suturing the subject. Indeed, for Miller, only the subject-function can subtend the operations of abstraction, of unification, of progression. There is, therefore, identity only for a subject. It is the subject which produces the primary unity; it is impossible to think self-identity outside of the subject, since the subject-function is the identity-function. We’ve known since Descartes that a subject is, by definition, a power identical to itself. The subject is the form of identity. At the same time, like the zero, the subject is never self-identical. Like the zero, it receives its identity from a lack, it misses itself. The relationship of the zero to the chain of numbers is the same as the relationship of the subject to the chain of discourse. Like the zero, the subject is both present and absent at once. “It figures [in the chain] as the element which is lacking, in the form of a stand-in. For, while there lacking, it is not purely and simply absent.”  Lacan shows that, in the same way that the zero is excluded from the beginning from the chain of numbers, the subject is excluded from the field of the Other, which is what comes to bar the subject. The subject displaces this bar onto the A, “a displacement whose effect is the emergence of signification signified to the subject.” Yet, “untouched by the exchange of the bar, this exteriority of the subject to the Other is maintained, which institutes the unconscious.” The summation of the subject in the field of the other calls for its annulment. The subject, in this way, is always alienated from and by the very process of its signification.
Regarding Frege, we have spoken of 1) unity, and 2) the role of 0 in succession, its status as number, and finally of its eclipse by the 1. This structure of appearance-disappearance, of suture, would be the point, emergent or derived, of a more originary logic which Miller, with Lacan’s help, proposes to name the “logic of the signifier.” A logic which proposes to “make itself known as a logic at the origin of logic,” which retraces the steps of logic, a “retroaction,” or a repression. “What is it that functions in the series of whole natural numbers to which we can assign their progression? And the answer, which I shall give at once before establishing it: in the process of the constitution of the series, in the genesis of progression, the function of the subject, miscognized, is operative.” Zero is the placeholder of the subject, which is itself, insofar as it is sutured, a placeholder.
Analyzing more closely the function and erasure of the zero, Miller distinguishes two axes. A vertical axis: the zero marks the bar on truth, separating the non-self-identical from the self-identical; insofar as it is a unit, it delimits a field. At the same time, he finds a horizontal axis: it erases that bar, since it represents itself in this field as “subsequently cancelling out as meaning in each of the [...] numbers which are caught up in the [...] chain of successional progression.” In some sense, the zero becomes something like a silent letter present in every number, insofar as they are self-identical but “non-identical” to other numbers. Miller concludes: “The impossible object, which the discourse of logic summons as the not-identical with itself and then rejects as the pure negative, which it summons and rejects in order to constitute itself as that which it is, which it summons and rejects wanting to know nothing of it, we name this object, in so far as it functions as the excess which operates in the series of numbers, the subject.”
*
In a gesture the appropriateness of which I will not here question, Badiou assimilates psychoanalysis and philosophy, both being effects, according to him, of “ideology,” or, rather, constituting it. Criticizing Miller’s argument, he lays into the logic of the signifier, which is to say he lays into the psychoanalytic viewpoint, and slides into philosophy, exaggerating the conclusions of his criticism of the latter with regards to science. This exaggeration makes up the object of section 4 of his article, titled “Torment of Philosophy.”
To synopsize the salient points of Badiou’s argument, he attempts to show that the concept of lack is profoundly alien to science, that science lacks nothing. It is in this sense that science does not respond, has nothing to answer for itself, does not need to justify any denial, any foreclosure, or any suture. The torment of philosophy, which echoes that of psychoanalysis, comes precisely from the fact that it thinks of itself as the answer to science, as that which gives science its subject—a subject which science has little use for. Here, Badiou is essentially rejecting the concept of alienation. If we identify the zero-function with the subject-function, as Miller does, if we say that the structure of the subject comes from its alienation, which is to say its subjection to the Other, then we make the discourse of logic itself an alienated discourse, thereby giving psychoanalysis priority over logic. Only psychoanalysis would allow one to pass from alienated truth to the truth of alienation, which would account for its superiority over logic.
In “Mark and Lack,” the stakes of which we can now begin to situate, Badiou lashes out at Frege and Miller at once. “In our view, both Frege's ideological representation of his own enterprise and the recapture of this representation in the lexicon of signifier, lack and the place of lack, mask the pure productive essence, the positional process through which logic, as machine, lacks nothing it does not produce elsewhere.” It is thus necessary to construct something to oppose the discourse of lack.
And here it is: “To this twofold process (preservation of the true; convocation and marking of lack), we will oppose the stratification of the scientific signifier.” Starting from logic, Badiou will later extend his concept of stratification to mathematics and physics. What is stratification, here? Badiou elaborates: “The theory of logic pertains to the modes of production of a division in linear writing.” Logic thus gains its authority from a cut in language between signifying signs—the signs of language—and pure signifiers without signifieds, which are its own marks and conventions. 
Logic begins with a stock of graphic marks, the alphabet, a, b, c…, which it cuts from their signifying milieu. It thus constitutes a collection of traces. It is this cut which Badiou opposes to the suture, a suture which the zero (or non-self-identity) is meant to introduce in the chain of numbers. As opposed to the suture, which, as we have said, always shows the mark or the scar of what it cuts across, the cut in language effectuated by logic is irrevocable and unambiguous. If logic is inderivable and undecidable, Godel’s theorem shows, it is not because there is a vague zone between normal language and logic, the place of a suture. The cut is perfectly clean, leaving out nothing and no one, which “presupposes the existence of a dichotomic mechanism that leaves no remainder,” which is to say “an autonomous order that is indeed closed, which is to say, entirely decidable.” 
Logic is a system of traces, closed in upon itself. Consequently, any concept of a tear or of a suture can be nothing more than a “psychical” effect of this closure, it takes shape only in ideology (which is to say in psychoanalysis and philosophy). The suture is an a posteriori effect, “the inevitable price of that closure” for the disciplines or discourses that suffer it, whereas such a suffering is alien to science. “What must be said, instead, is that the existence of an infallible closed mechanism conditions the existence of a mechanism that can be said to be unclosable, and therefore internally limited. The exhibition of a suture presupposes the existence of a foreclosure.” The relations are inverted now. By revealing lack as the original truth, psychoanalysis and philosophy deduce or derive it, aiming to trace their own lack of closure and independence onto science. 
Badiou is playing with the word “foreclosure”—the foreclosure of science is not a psychotic foreclosure, only ideology would propose such an interpretation, by struggling to characterize the scientific discourse as a discourse alienated from the fact of its presupposed lack of subject. Badiou continues, “Gödel's theorem is not the site of separation's failure, but of its greatest efficacy.” In the same way, “The zero is not the mark of lack in a system, but the sign that abbreviates the lack of a mark.” If there is lack, it does not even appear, it puts an end to itself, immediately compensated for by a substitution. The signs used in logic are mutually substitutable, they can replace each other according to the rules of their closed system. And there we find the “identity of the signifying order with itself.” “The logico-mathematical signifier is sutured only to itself—it is indefinitely stratified.” There is no substantial self-identity. Here, identity is that of marks, traces, by definition without external model or referent, which can replace each other, which are interchangeable, all without creating holes in presence.
At this point in the analysis, we see the expansion of this stratification to sciences other than mathematical logic: “Moreover, it is science as a whole that takes self-identity to be a predicate of marks rather than of the object. The rule certainly holds for the facts of writing proper to mathematics. But it also holds for the inscriptions of energy proper to physics.”
If we define self-identity by substitutability—if, in other words, we move from essence to sign—then, because nothing is not substitutable for itself, there is no longer any “non-self-identical.” And in any case, the non-identical is nonetheless substitutable, which is proven by the substitution of the 0 by the 1. What’s not thinkable for mathematics is that which cannot be substituted for itself. But this “unthinkable” does not constitute an “unthought.” Science does not have an unthought, and this is what makes philosophy and psychoanalysis suffer. We could just as well say that this is a radical unthought, if we understand by this that it is not part of the order of scientific thought: “What is not substitutable-for-itself is something radically unthought, of which the logical mechanism bears no trace. It is impossible to turn it into an evanescence [...]. What is not substitutable-for-itself is foreclosed without appeal or mark.”
Subsequently, scientific writing is a “play of appearances and disappearances between successive signifying orders; never exposed to the convocation of a lack, whether in the object or the thing.” Later, he continues: “On this side of the signifying chain, if the latter is scientific, there are nothing but other chains. If the signifier is sutured, it is only to itself. It is only itself that it lacks at each of its levels: it regulates its lacks without taking leave of itself. The scientific signifier is neither sutured nor split, but stratified.” We must remember that for Miller, the suture is a “placeholder” for the subject. Now, according to Badiou, because there is no suture in the signifying chains of logic, there is no subject of science. 
“Must we therefore renounce [annuler] the concept of suture?” asks Badiou—must we therefore renounce the subject-function? No. It is rather a matter of “assigning to it its proper domain.” Its domain is ideology, and Badiou now slides from psychoanalysis into philosophy, which makes this state of affairs perfectly obvious: “We will call ‘philosophy,’” he says, “the ideological region specializing in science.” Philosophy is “charged with effacing the break by displaying the scientific signifier as a regional paradigm of the signifier-in-itself: this is Plato's relation to Eudoxus, Leibniz's relation to Leibniz, Kant's relation to Newton, Husserl's relation to Bolzano and Frege, and perhaps Lacan's relation to mathematical logic.” The specificity of the philosophical gesture, vis-à-vis science, which is its most intimate other, would consist, then, in designating its signifiers (those of science) as belonging to a specific region of ideality—but only to one such region—which would call for its replacement in and by a philosophical ideality. That is the expression of its lack, which only philosophy would be able to suture. A scientific idea cannot be characterized as an “idea” except by means of a philosophical determination of that ideality. It would be philosophy’s task alone to define the idea. Thus the traditional auto-positioning of philosophy as region of all regions, arch-region, arch-discourse. In this manner, philosophy assigns lack to science, denying that it makes a clean cut in order to renew science’s dependence on philosophy (which is certainly clear in the Platonic figures of the divided line and the cave).
Philosophy, Badiou continues, thus constructs a properly philosophical concept of science, but the problem is that science “cannot receive this mark.” Further, Badiou writes: “that which, in philosophy, declares itself science, is invariably the lack of science. That which philosophy lacks, and that to which it is sutured, is its very object (science), which is nevertheless marked within the former by the place it will never come to occupy. We can claim in all rigour that science is the subject of philosophy, and this precisely because there is no subject of science.” In this way, philosophy alienates itself in lending its own subject to science.
In the language that I have chosen to adopt here, which is that of the response, we can thus say that philosophy is that discourse which attempts to respond for science, which is to say, that attempts to be ontologically responsible for it. It is a discourse which undertakes to make science respond by constituting itself as a placeholder for a response that science does not give. Hegel says it well, in the Preface to the Phenomenology of Spirit, that mathematics is dead, that it does not respond. Only a speculative grasp of mathematics can reanimate it, make it speak. But such a response, we could object, is the problem, as it is destined in principle to never be scientific.
*
I do not plan to critique Badiou’s argument here, nor to show how he has changed his position and point of view in his later works. I choose instead to end on the strange resonance that I have detected between his remarks and the admirable analysis of the question of a response made by Derrida in “Passions: An Oblique Offering.”

*
Derrida asks himself what it means to respond, playing at the outset with his situation as an invitee of a colloquium asking what it means to respond to an invitation. Quickly, the question grows and gets deeper. It is a question of seeing how responding always leaves open the possibility of not responding, and how the “not responding,” which is what concerns me here, cannot be interpreted in terms of lack. Not responding, writes Derrida, “would have nothing to do with a shortcoming, a lapse in logical or demonstrative rigor, quite the contrary.”
The non-response would be inscribed in every response as its characteristic secret, not as a lack. If it is in principle entirely possible to detect the non-response in the philosophical response itself, it is nonetheless necessary to leave the realm of philosophy in order to demonstrate it. It is thus not to philosophy that Derrida turns, nor is it, incidentally, to science, but to literature. If it is “impossible to respond,” says Derrida, such an impossibility is not of the order of knowledge. But philosophy is linked to knowledge. Nor can that impossibility be of the order of science. That which does not respond, either in philosophy or in science, is not the unconscious, either. The non-response, that is what Derrida calls the secret. Once again, this secret belongs neither to psychoanalysis, nor to philosophy, nor to science.
The space of the secret, of the non-response, is literature. “Not that I want to reduce everything to it [literature],” says Derrida, “especially not philosophy.” He continues, “but if, without liking literature in general and for its own sake, I like something about it, which above all cannot be reduced to some aesthetic quality, to some source of formal pleasure [jouissance], this would be in place of the secret. In place of an absolute secret.”
By literature, one must not understand “fine literature” or “poetry,” but that “modern invention” that has mixed itself up with the “right to say everything. Literature thus ties its destiny to a certain non-censure, to the space of democratic freedom.” However, Derrida continues, “this authorization to say everything paradoxically makes the author an author who is not responsible to anyone, not even to himself [...]. This authorization to say everything acknowledges a right to absolute nonresponse.” Later, Derrida continues, “there is, in the exemplary secret of literature, a chance of saying everything without touching upon the secret.”
It seems to me that at a certain moment, two extremes meet. That the foreclosure, the absolute closure in which Badiou encloses the scientific signifier, can immediately invert itself into the absolute openness in which Derrida situates literature. Beginning with an enclosed whole or with an open whole, the signifier, in either case, does not respond. That is its secret. A secret that is not something hidden, which would be possible to detect, a secret which, maybe, does not even exist, or is nothing other than what it is: a non-response without lack. “There is something secret. But it does not conceal itself. Heterogeneous to the hidden, to the obscure, to the nocturnal, to the invisible, to what can be dissimulated and indeed to what is nonmanifest in general, it cannot be unveiled. It remains inviolable even when one thinks one has revealed it.”
There would then be, at the heart of the process of truth, a non-response, an indifference to response, a special space, separated but without suture, in which psychoanalysis and philosophy would certainly have their place, like all discourses, but which could not be subjected to them, precisely because that space, immensely open and immensely closed, is absolutely alien to the subject. The secret is “not of consciousness, nor of the subject, nor of Dasein.”
*
For a long time, Althusserian Marxist discourse defined truth as a “process without subject.” Badiou’s essay, “Mark and Lack,” undeniably belongs to that history. Even if the times have changed, later premises “without subject” have a point in common with such a discourse. Derrida’s position, and more recently that of Quentin Meillassoux in his work, After Finitude, put forward the idea of an absolute non-response of the real, which is another way of saying the critique or deposing of the subject. Even if their perspectives are very different, even sometimes opposed to each other, it is a matter of, in each case, circumscribing the space of a void which is neither a lack nor a flaw, but that of science (Badiou), of the secret (Derrida), or of the real (Meillassoux). In After Finitude, it is the real which is said to not respond, in the form of those fossils that do without us, of that being of a non-correlated world, indifferent to human presence, indifferent to any subject.
There, too, philosophy seems like a forced response, a determination to answer for, to make respond, or to respond in the place of. Philosophy would then indeed move closer to psychoanalysis, which, as Foucault affirmed, has as its function extracting confessions and revealing secrets. Philosophy would be, like psychoanalysis, a glutton for the subject [une acharnée du sujet].
Must we and can we today content ourselves with such a vision of philosophy? Who can say if the “secret” or the “non-response,” the “non-lack” or the “non-correlated” is not the subjective portion of reality? A subjectivity which would not be external to the real, correlated to it, but a subjectivity of the real itself, its autonomous support structure? The subject must always answer for the fact that it is at the same time substance, which is to say, absolutely independent of any “subject.” Dialectical negativity, then, is not the expression of a lack, but the voice of the real insofar as it reflects itself as egoless subjectivity of the connection of things. Lacan was perhaps saying that when he wrote that the individual subject is always excluded from the real subject.

Catherine Malabou. Ten issues of Cahiers pour l’Analyse were published in France between 1966 and 1969. All of the essays can be found in a bilingual French-English edition on the website created by CRMEP at the University of Kingston, titled Concept and Form: The Cahiers pour l’Analyse and Contemporary French Thought, with indications of the original pagination. PDFs of the original version of each article are also available on that site. In this paper, I refer to that site. Alain Badiou’s essay “Marque et manque, à propos du zéro” appeared in Cahiers pour l’analyse vol. 10, La Formalisation, 1969, 150–173. ———. Jacques-Alain Miller, “La Suture: Elements d’une logique du significant.” Jacques Derrida, On the Name, ed. Thomas Dutoit, trans. David Wood et al. (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1995). Gottlob Frege, Foundations of Arithmetic, trans. J. L. Austin (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1980).  Ibid., 85. Miller, “La Suture,” 42. Ibid. Ibid., 43. Ibid. Ibid., 44. From there, he can deduce the other numbers by positing the proposition: “There is a concept F and an object x that falls under it, such that the number that corresponds to the concept F is n and the number that corresponds to the concept ‘falls under F but is not equal to x” is m.’” Which means the same as “n follows in the series of natural numbers directly after m.” Frege, Foundations of Arithmetic, § 76. 89. Miller, “La Suture,” 45. Ibid., 39. Ibid. Ibid., 47. “The signifier [is] that which represents the subject for another signifier.” Ibid., 48. Ibid., 49. Ibid., 39. Ibid. Ibid., 40. Ibid., 46. Ibid., 47. Badiou. “Mark and Lack…”, op. cit., 161. Ibid., 151. The cut, Badiou says, takes place in language. By the three mechanisms of “concatenation,” “formation,” and “derivation,” logic establishes the “series,” which is to say the chain. See Badiou, “Mark and Lack…” 151.  Ibid., 155. Ibid., 156. Ibid.  Ibid., 157.  Ibid.  Ibid., 160. Ibid., 161. Ibid., 163. Ibid.  Ibid.  Ibid. Derrida, “Passion,” 11. Ibid., 28. Ibid. Ibid., 28–9. Ibid., 29 Ibid., 26. In The Postcard, Derrida already affirms that lack is a metaphysical term, which has no meaning except in reference to presence. “The difference which interests me here,” he says, “is that — a formula to be understood as one will — the lack does not have its place in dissemination.“ Jacques Derrida, The Postcard, trans. Alan Bass (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987).  Derrida, On The Name, 30.