
PHANTOM LIMBS AND PLASTICITY:
MERLEAU-PONTY AND CURRENT NEUROBIOLOGY

Catherine Malabou

At the end of Chapter III of Phenomenology of Perception,1 Merleau-Ponty summarizes his recent research on the relationship between body and motility. He declares: “What we have discovered through the study of motricity is, in short, a new sense of the word ‘sense’.” (PP 148/183) By “we,” Merleau-Ponty means we phenomenologists. And by “the study of motility (motricité),” Merleau-Ponty means “the neurobiological study of motility.” This new meaning of the word “meaning” (sens) clearly emerges from the crossing between a phenomenological and a biological approach of the body’s spatiality, of the body’s specific orientation in space and movement, in other words of “being in the world.” When it comes to the body, to life, to the issue of being this living body in this world, it is of primary importance to give up what Merleau-Ponty calls “intellectualist psychology” as well as “idealist philosophy,” and to stress the empirical biological dimension of our existential situation. He insists on the necessity to take into account the most recent biological and neurobiological discoveries. This double approach constitutes as we know the singularity and uniqueness of the Phenomenology of Perception.
My first issue here is to interrogate what currently remains from this approach. It seems that with the most recent neurobiological discoveries concerning bodily motility, we are also witnessing the emergence of a new meaning of the word “meaning.” To what extent is this new meaning still indebted to Merleau-Ponty? To what extent is it not? At first sight, as it is practically always the case, the confrontation between the domain of continental philosophy and that of strict neurobiology seems unbalanced. In the first part of the article, I will show that the current neurobiological meaning of the word meaning appears to be apparently poorer and much less differentiated than the one Merleau-Ponty was talking about. Again, for Merleau-Ponty, the novelty of the word meaning results from the crossing of several approaches. It seems on the contrary that the neurobiological definition of the new meaning of the word meaning currently reduces it to a mere empirical and objective set of data, deprived of any phenomenological or existential dimension.
The problem is of great importance, as the issues at stake here (body, motility, being in the world), as Merleau-Ponty exposes in chapter 4 of part II entitled “Others and the Human World,” concern the intertwining between nature and the human world, between our biological existence and the way it projects itself into the community—this projection appearing to be the political 
translation of the bodily naturality. In fact, and this will be my second part, the discrepancy between two new meanings of the word “meaning” (sens) is only apparent, and it will become clear that a genuine dialogue between Merleau-Ponty and current neurobiology is possible, that transforms Merleau-Ponty’s bio-phenomenological conclusions in a most promising and interesting way.
I will situate the confrontation in the specific context of two neural pathologies that cause profound modifications of the body schema. First, phantom pains and phantom limbs, second a pathology called anosognosia. Anosognosia is a condition in which a person who suffers disability seems unaware of or denies the existence of his or her disability. This may include unawareness of quite dramatic impairments, such as blindness or paralysis.2 This pathology only appears when the right hemisphere is injured, the patient becoming then unaware of the left side of his or her body.
Why these examples? First, because Merleau-Ponty announces the emergence of the new meaning of the word meaning just after his analysis of such pathologies. Second, because the divergence between his approach and the current neurobiological one is quite manifest on these points.
This divergence concerns the way of interpreting the kind of negation or negativity involved in phantom pains and anosognosia. Merleau-Ponty considers phantom pains or anosognosia to be cases of what Freud calls “psychic refusal” or disavowal. Phantom pains or phantom limbs would express the patient’s refusal of her own mutilation. According to Merleau-Ponty, the subjects suffering from anosognosia would not say: “I cannot see that my left side is paralysed” but “I don’t want to see that my left side is paralyzed.” Because being in the world necessarily implies a double situation of the body, a biological one and an existential one, these pathologies have two sides: they are both objective medical facts and hermeneutical modes of being. The body, as Merleau-Ponty puts it, “interprets itself.” (PP 151/186) It interprets itself as non-mutilated or as non-suffering, because it cannot regard itself but as a significant whole despite its fragmentation:
What refuses the mutilation or the deficiency in us is an I that is engaged in a certain physical and inter-human world, an I that continues and tends toward its world despite deficiencies or amputations and that to this extent does not de jure recognize them. The refusal of the deficiency is but the reverse side of our inference in a world, the implicit negation of what runs counter to the natural movement that throws us into our tasks, our worries, our situation, and our familiar horizons. To have a phantom limb is to remain open to all of the actions of which the arm alone is capable and to stay within the practical field that one had prior to the mutilation. The body is the vehicle of being in the world, and, for a living being, having a body means being united with a definite milieu, merging with certain projects, and being perpetually engaged therein. (PP 83-84/110-111)
Or:
Here the phenomenon of the phantom limb is clarified through the phenomenon of anosognosia, which clearly demands a psychological explanation. Subjects who 43 

systematically ignore their right hand, and who rather offer their left hand when asked for their right, nevertheless speak of their paralyzed arm as a “long and cold serpent,” which excludes the hypothesis of a genuine anesthesia and suggests the hypothesis of a refusal of the deficiency. (PP 79/105)
The refusal must then be understood as an act of Sinngebung, meaning bestowing. The body maintains its integrity through negation. What hides behind the fear of having lost a part of oneself is the fear of being excluded from the realm of social and political life. Merleau-Ponty often describes this fear in the war wounded who lost an arm. His fear is that of being excluded from the human community, held back to childhood or primitivity, that is to prepolitical and prehistorical life, a life in which movement, motor actions, are not yet signs. The brain, in particular the motor cortex, reorganizes the body schema after the accident or the lesion in order to sustain the refusal of the deficiency and the need for the political meaning of being in the world.
The refusal is then both a neural and a phenomenological phenomenon. To differentiate it from the mere Freudian disavowal, Merleau-Ponty calls it “a repression or an organic suppression [refoulement organique].” (PP 80/106) Such “terms, which are hardly Cartesian, force us to form the idea of an organic thought by which the relation between the ‘psychical,’ and the ‘physiological’ could become conceivable.” (PP 80/106) The unity of the psychic and the physiological forms a shield against the loss of the historical meaning of being in the world. “[…] The refusal of the deficiency, which is a total attitude of our existence, needs this highly specialized modality which we call a sensory motor circuit in order to actualize itself” (PP 89/116) that maintains the amputated limb existing in order “to maintain a void that the history of the subject will fill in.” (PP 88/116)
When we now turn toward the current neurobiological analysis of the same pathologies, we can only be struck by what appears almost as an incompatibility with Merleau-Ponty’s approach. It seems that the new meaning of the word meaning, brought to light by such analyses, is purely and simply a loss of meaning. A loss of meaning or a regression compared to the rich and complex description of the phenomenon of being in the world. A loss of the political meaning that phantom limbs and anosognosia are, according to Merleau-Ponty supposed to protect. Most neurologists currently consider these pathologies to be deprived of any psychological and existential signification. The “inability to acknowledge disease in oneself,” as Damasio characterizes anosgnosia in Descartes’ Error, wouldn’t have any psychological causes:
Imagine a victim of a major stroke, entirely paralyzed in the left side of the body, unable to move hand and arm, leg and foot […], unable to stand and walk. And now imagine that same person oblivious to the entire problem, reporting that nothing is possibly the matter, answering the question, “How do you feel?” with a sincere “Fine.” […]44 

Someone unacquainted with anosognosia might think that this “denial” of illness is “psychologically” motivated, that it is an adaptative reaction to the previous affliction. I can state with confidence that it is not the case.3
It is not the case: the inability to regard oneself as disabled would only be a non dialectic kind of “no,” with only one meaning: the patient, for objective and medical reasons would be absolutely unable to see that she is impaired. There is no refusal in such a fact, only a physical cognitive incapacity. “The ‘denial’ of illness results from the loss of a particular cognitive function. This loss of cognitive function depends on a particular brain system which can be damaged by a stroke or by various neurological diseases.”4
Damasio’s approach to phantom limbs and phantom pain is extremely rapid and manifests the same abstract negativity: “patients with the phantom-limb condition may report that they feel their missing limb is still there, but they realize that it clearly is not.”5
It seems that we are facing two opposite conceptions of pathological negativity. A first one, full of sense, of hermeneutical and political resources, that tends to establish the psychological meaning of this negativity. A second one, hardwired and reductionist, that reduces negativity to a one-sided objective reaction. The dimensions of being in the world, being in the community, the effort to maintain the social networks by means of the “organic repression,” would have purely and simply disappeared.
In reality, as I announced in the beginning, a secret dialectical relationship links up these two negativities: disavowal on the one hand, abstract factual negativity on the other. This secret dialectical link organizes every kind of encounter or confrontation between continental philosophy and neurobiology or cognitive psychology in general. We gradually discover that the neurobiological point of view concerning phantom limbs, phantom pains and anosognosia conceals not a reduction but a radicalization of Merleau-Ponty’s position, a deconstruction of certain rigid definitions of being in the world, and address a genuine political issue to the Phenomenology of Perception.
Before I expose this reversal, I will briefly develop two neurobiological arguments that achieve and accomplish in a way Damasio’s reductionist position.
The first comes from V. S. Ramachandran who, in his book Phantoms in the Brain, insists upon the impossibility to consider phantom pains and limbs or anosognosia to be psychic refusals or denials. These phenomena, he says, of course express the need to preserve the body schema’s stability. In that sense, the “Freudian defenses (denials, repressions, confabulations…)” are useful to understand the nature of this need for stability. Rapidly though, Ramachandran comes to the same conclusions as Damasio: first, Freud says that all of us use defense mechanisms every day of our lives. What then is the difference between a normal and a pathological defense mechanism or psychic refusal? “One problem with the Freudian view is that it doesn’t explain the difference in magnitude of psychological defense mechanisms between patients with 45 

anosognosia and what is seen in normal people […].”6 It is true that Merleau-Ponty does not seem to bring an answer to this question.
Second, anosognosia only appears when the right hemisphere is impaired: “The second problem with the Freudian view is that it doesn’t explain the asymmetry of this syndrome. […] When people suffer damage to the left brain hemisphere, with paralysis on the body’s right side, they almost never experience denial.”7 Merleau-Ponty does not seem to bring any answer to such a problem either.
In order to distinguish these pathologies from psychic refusals, Ramachandran proposes then to characterize them as “neglect syndromes,” without genuine hermeneutical dimensions.
The other argument goes even further. It is developed by Shaun Gallagher in his book How the Body Shapes the Mind. Focusing on phantom limbs and pain phenomena, Gallagher notices that Merleau-Ponty never takes into account the pathology called “aplasia,” that is the existence of phantoms in congenital absence of a limb or following early amputations (prior to age 6). “The psychological and neurological literature stretching from the early twentieth century to the early 1960s indicated that in cases of aplasia and in most cases of early amputation no phantoms develop. This was the established scientific doctrine and it was the view held in the overwhelming majority of studies up until the early 1960s.”8 Merleau-Ponty is of course part of the list.
What is there at stake? The refusal to consider the existence of aplasia is founded on the fact most psychologists, and Merleau-Ponty himself, considered that no body schema exists at birth. Even less can there be for them something as an innate body schema. “The studies conducted by Simmel confirmed this view. There is no phantom in aplasia because the limb in question is never experienced, and this is never incorporated into a body schema. […] This view of the phantom was also expressed by Merleau-Ponty in connection with its acceptance of the received doctrine that the body schema is a product of the development.”9
We encounter “plasticity” at this point. According to Merleau-Ponty, the body schema is plastic, and this plasticity has two characteristics. First of all, it means that the body schema forms itself under the influence of experience and development. It is supple and open to change [that is why it cannot be innate]. Second, this plasticity is also to be understood as a compensatory power. When the body schema is impaired, as in the case of the missing limb for example, but this works also for anosognosia, it reconstitutes its integrity and reforms itself, hence the vivid sensation of the missing limb experiences by the amputated.
Gallagher shows that taking early amputation or aplasia into account challenges such an accepted vision of the body schema. The body schema, states Galllagher, is innate. “The more recent data on aplasics indicate that aplasic phantoms do exist. […] We can infer on this basis that this is evidence for an innate body schema.”10 Aplasia would be the expression of a flaw in this innate body schema. The body schema is innate: Such a statement produces at first sight a terrible effect.46 

It seems to negate the definition of existence as being in the world, as a way to construct one’s relationship with the world through experience, as this intertwining between biological, historical and political life. In other words, it seems to negate all plasticity.
Damasio, Ramachandran, Gallagher would then share the same position: no hermeneutics, no being in the world, no political meaning of the wounds, of the negativity involved in the refusal of one’s own pathology. Just objective facts founded on a deterministic vision of the body schema. Genetics against phenomenology.
It is precisely at that point, where everything seems to condemn neurobiology, to accuse it of reductionism, to regard it as a regression that everything turns upside down and that the situation reverses. This reversal concerns the status of plasticity. According to Merleau-Ponty, as I just said, plasticity means the ability of the body schema to form itself and to compensate after wounds or impairments. Thanks to the neurobiological approach, such a conception of plasticity suddenly appears as something that has to be discussed and perhaps even deconstructed. What is compensation for Merleau-Ponty? What does “compensate” mean here, in the pathological context? Plasticity sculpts our being in the world and our body schema in the following sense: “for the normal person, the subject’s intentions are immediately reflected in the perceptual field: they polarize it, put their stamp on it, or finally, effortlessly give birth there to a wave of signification” (PP 133/165). When a pathology occurs, this first, primordial plasticity is disrupted, interrupted, “For the patient, the perceptual field has lots this plasticity. […] the world no longer suggests any significations to him and, reciprocally, the significations that he considers are no longer embodied in the given world” (PP 133/165). We see that a second plasticity, the compensatory one, replaces the first, formative one, and tries to repair the loss. This is what occurs in phantom limbs and anosognosia cases. According to Merleau-Ponty, it is clear that this repairing plasticity is secondary. The fragmented body schema always comes after the originary one. Once reconstituted, it works much less well. The way in which it preserves the patients’ being in the world is itself paralyzed, incomplete. In other words, Merleau-Ponty considers compensatory plasticity to be itself a pathology:
Illness, like childhood or like the “primitive” state is a complete form of existence, and the procedures that it employs in order to replace the normal functions that have been destroyed are themselves pathological phenomena. The normal cannot be deduced from the pathological… through a mere change of sign. The substitutions must be understood as substitutions, as allusions to a fundamental function that they attempt to replace, but of which they do not give us a direct image. (PP 110/138)
Again, we find the comparison between illness and childhood or primitivity, and it appears that compensatory plasticity itself acts like a clumsy child. “[S]ubstitutions must be understood as substitutions,” as copies, shams, 47 

immitations: how far away from the deconstructive understanding of the substitute or of the supplement such a concept of substitution is!
Phantom limbs or anosognosia appear then to be defective substitutions for a definitively lost originary integrity. Merleau-Ponty says that these phenomena express the patient’s incapacity to project himself in the future, his pathological attachment to the present time and tense. “The phantom arm must be the same arm that was torn apart by shrapnel—whose visible envelope had at some point burned or decayed—and that now comes to haunt the present body by merging with it. The phantom limb is thus, like a repressed experience, a previous present that cannot commit to becoming past.” (PP 88/115) Further: in traumatic experience, “the subject still remains open to the same impossible future.” (PP 85/112) The patient suffering from anosognosia would then not only say: I don’t want to see that my left arm is paralysed, but I won’t ever see that it is. My refusal is permanent, a permanent present.
This arguable vision of compensation and plasticity would be totally different if we were to consider substitutions not to be substitutions in the traditional sense, not as responses to a loss, not as secondary, but as originary instances. Instances that would be as primordial, in their virtuality, as “normal functions.” Compensation would then appear as a creative movement, as a source, a resource of “first time,” and not as a replica-making process. There would then be no hierarchy between the normal and the pathological, between normal and replacing or compensatory plasticity.
What if formation always were to be a compensation? What if creation and substitution, originary movement and reorganization were to become synonymous? What if the body’s schema’s “remapping” were to be contemporary to its “mapping?” These issues surprisingly arise from the neurobiological approach of compensation and plasticity.
What does Gallagher exactly say when he insists on the innate character of the body schema? Let’s go back to the aplasia and the phenomenon of phantom limbs in patients who have never been amputated. The phantom arm for example, is linked with the impairment of the neural hand-mouth pattern:
In the non-aplasic case, hand-mouth coordination is an automatic movement [in foetal life]. In the case of aplasia the same movement pattern may be initiated, but without the hand, there is no tactile reinforcement of that experience. Lacking such reinforcement, it is possible that the neural matrix underlying the schema begins to reshape itself even in utero. Depending on individual differences and circumstances, the phantom may disappear or be reactivated, much as behavioral studies indicate.11
We clearly see here that in the case of aplasia, phantom limbs are not phantoms of a lost limb, but phantoms of a phantom, phantoms of a compensation. In the innate body schema, there is already an attempt at replacing the hand, and the phantom is and will be the phantom of this attempt. This idea of an innate reformation, reorganization or restructuration of a neural matrix is fascinating. The conception of an innate body schema does not amount, contrarily to what I 48 

suggested a moment earlier, to a conception of a non plastic body schema. On the contrary, it introduces plasticity into innateness. Such an introduction obviously displaces the frontiers between bare life, understood here as foetal life, or even with infantile life, prepolitical life, and life understood as being in the world.
Gallagher uses Ramachandran’s book Phantoms in the Brain as a basis to infer his conception of an originary neural reorganization or reorganizibility. Ramachandran shows that most phantom pains proceed from neural restructurations. After a hand amputation for example, some neural structures from the somatory-sensorial cortex may invade other areas. In this case, the sensory fibers originating from the face invade the territory of the missing hand. “Therefore, when I touched Tom’s face, he also felt sensations in his missing hand.”12 “The phantom does not exist in the hand area; it exists in most central parts of the brain, where the remapping has occurred. To put it crudely, the phantom emerges not from the stump but from the face and jaws, because every time Tom smiles or moves his face and lips, the impulse activates the ‘hand’ area of his cortex, creating the illusion that the hand is still there […] If so, the only way to get rid of the phantom would be to remove his jaw.”13 “The implications are staggering. First and foremost, they suggest that brain maps can change, sometimes with astonishing rapidity. This finding flatly contradicts one of the most widely accepted dogmas in neurology—the fixed nature of connections in the human brain.”14
Of course, in such cases, reorganization comes after birth and after amputation. Nevertheless, Gallagher declares: “As several studies have shown, amputation may cause a disinhibition or unmasking of pre-existing synaptic connections that allow for the simultaneous transmission of information from the face to both the face and the hand area of the cortex […].”15 One can thus acknowledge the originary and innate existence of compensation, virtually present in the body schema, that can be activated in fetal life in cases of aplasia, and in life in general after an amputation. Compensation works as a substitution mechanism, but this substitution is as old, in its possibility, as the normal function it is determined to substitute for. We may then consider that the originary formative plasticity and the compensatory plasticity are both, on equal footing, existential possibilities. Following this conception, we may also consider that phantom limbs and anosgnosia are not exactly psychical refusals or disavowals, but the results of a remapping of ourselves that doesn’t have much resemblance with a first mapping—a first mapping that in some cases never took place and never happened. A phantom replacing a phantom. We might even say that the body schema itself is a phantom. As Ramachandran puts it: “The experiments I’ve discussed so far have helped us understand what is going on in the brains of patients with phantoms and given us hints as to how we might help alleviate their pain. But there is a deeper message here: Your own body is a phantom, one that your brain has temporarily constructed purely for convenience.”16
The dialectical confrontation at work here between phenomenology and neuroscience, between two approaches of negativity, refusal and neglect, 49 

produces a final reversal. What seemed to be reductionist and regressive positions appear in the end to be deconstructive tools that radicalize the meaning of the substitute or supplement. There is no hierarchy between the two meanings of plasticity: formative and compensatory. The neurobiological approach helps us to understand substitution as an originary existential, and in this sense as an ontological, possibility. This is an example of how supple, thin, and improbable the frontiers between ontology and biology are currently becoming—or perhaps always have been.
In Phenomenology of Perception, defending his idea of a culturally constructed body schema, Merleau-Ponty assimilates fetal life, neonate life and childhood itself to what he calls “unformed” or “amorphous” (that is non plastic) modes of living.
If my first years are behind me like some unknown land, this is not through some fortuitous breakdown of memory or the lack of a complete exploration: there is nothing to be known in these unexplored lands. For example, nothing was perceived in intra-uterine life, and this is why there is nothing to remember. There was nothing but the sketch of a natural self and of a natural time. This anonymous life is merely the limit of the temporal dispersion that always threatens the historical present. (PP 362/404)
We saw, with Gallagher in particular, how difficult, and even impossible it was to consider the pre-natal existence as an amorphous state of things, to consider the natural self to be non-historical. The idea of an innate plasticity, as well as the idea of a plastic innateness, challenges the distinction between nature and history. I will give two last brief quotes 1) from Gallagher: “In this context the concept of innateness is not a philosophical threat to the concept of experience.”17 2) from Ramachandran: “I mention these bizarre examples because they imply that phantom limbs emerge from complex interplay of both genetic and experiential variables […].”18 The idea of a historical organicity challenges all idea of bare or prepolitical life. What is originary bio-political is the substitutive and transposable character of our neural maps, that is, of our nature. Subjective identity is erasable and replaceable from the start. There could not be any community without the natural community that we are originary, from the beginning, forming with ourselves, with the different mappings of ourselves.
Catherine Malabou
cmalabou@club-internet.fr50 

BIBLIOGRAPHY:
Damasio, A. 1994. Descartes’ Error. New York, NY: G.P. Putnam.
Gallagher, S. 2005. How the Body Shapes the Mind. New York, NY: Oxford.
Merleau-Ponty, M. 2012. Phenomenology of Perception. (Tr. Donald A. Landes) Oxford: Routledge.
Ramachandran, V. –S. 1998. Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the Mysteries of the Human Mind. New York, NY: William Morrow.
OTHER:
Ashbaugh, Anne, 1983, “The Fool in the Farce: Merleau-Ponty’s ‘Philosophy Of’,” Philosophy Today, 27: 236-241.
Bernet, Rudolf, 1993, “The Subject in Nature: Reflections on Merleau-Ponty’s Phenomenology of Perception,” in Merleau-Ponty in Contemporary Perspectives, P. Burke and J. van der Veken (eds.), Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Casey, Edward, 1984, “Habitual body and Memory in Merleau-Ponty,” Man and World, 17: 279-298.
Dastur, Francoise, 1984, “Consciousness and Body in the Phenomenology of Merleau-Ponty,” in Phenomenology of Life, Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka (ed.), Dordrecht: Reidel, 1117-125.
Dillon, M. C., 1988, Merleau-Ponty’s Ontology, Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
– 1988, “Desire: Language and Body,” in Postmodernism and Continental Philosophy, H. 
Flynn, Bernard, 1984, “Textuality and the Flesh: Derrida and Merleau-Ponty,” Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology, 15: 164-179.
Green, Andre, 1964, “Du Comportement a la Chair: Itineraire de Merleau-Ponty,” Critique, 211: 1017-1042.
Lawlor, Leonard, Evans, Fred, ed., Chiasms, Marleau-Ponty’s Notion of Flesh, New York: Suny Series in Philosophy, 2000.
Leder, Drew, 1992, “A Tale of Two Bodies: the Cartesian Corpse and the Lived Body,” in The Body in Medical Thought and Practice, Drew Leder (ed.), Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Lingis, Alphonso, 1971, “Intentionality and Corporeity,” Analecta Husserliana, 1: 75-90.
O’Connor, Tony, 1981, “Merleau-Ponty and the Problem of the Unconsciousness,” in Merleau-Ponty: Perception, Structure, Language, John Sallis (ed.), New Jersey: Humanities Press, 77-88.
Wiggins, Osborne, 1979, “Merleau-Ponty and Piaget: An Essay in Philosophical Psychology,” Man and World, 12: 21-34.
Zaner R., 1964, The Problem of Embodiment: Some Contributions to a Phenomenology of the Body, The Hague: Nijhoff.51 

NOTES:
1 Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Phénomenologie de la perception, (Paris: Editions Gallimard, 1945), translated by Donald Landes as Phenomenology of Perception (Oxford: Routledge, 2012). Page references to this work, (hereafter cited as PP), will follow the order: English page, French page.
2 It was first named by neurologist Joseph Babinski in 1914 [1] although relatively little has been discovered about the cause of the condition since its initial identification. The word comes from the Greek words “nosos” disease and “gnosis” knowledge (an-/a- is a negative prefix).
3 A. Damasio, Descartes’ Error (New York, NY: G.P. Putnam, 1994), pp. 62.
4 Damasio, Descartes’ Error, pp. 63.
5 Damasio, Descartes’ Error, pp. 154.
6 V. S. Ramachandran, Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the Mysteries of the Human Mind (New York, NY: William Morrow, 1998), pp. 131.
7 Ramachandran, Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the Mysteries of the Human Mind, pp. 132.
8 Shaun Gallagher, How the Body Shapes the Mind (New York, NY: Oxford, 2005), pp. 87.
9 Gallagher, How the Body Shapes the Mind, pp. 87.
10 Gallagher, How the Body Shapes the Mind, pp. 93.
11 Gallagher, How the Body Shapes the Mind, pp. 98.
12 Ramachandran, Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the Mysteries of the Human Mind, pp. 29.
13 Ramachandran, Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the Mysteries of the Human Mind, pp. 33.
14 Ramachandran, Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the Mysteries of the Human Mind, pp. 31.
15 Gallagher, How the Body Shapes the Mind, pp. 99.
16 Ramachandran, Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the Mysteries of the Human Mind, pp. 58.
17 Gallagher, How the Body Shapes the Mind, pp. 171.
18 Ramachandran, Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the Mysteries of the Human Mind, pp. 58.
