WHITHER MATERIALISM? ALTHUSSER/DARWIN

	Whither materialism? This title echoes another one, “Whither Marxism?,” which was that of a conference held in 1993 in California, where Derrida presented an oral version of Specters of Marx. With regards to this ambiguous title, Derrida proposed that “one may hear beneath the question ‘Where is Marxism going?’ another question: ‘Is Marxism dying?’”
	The same ambiguity will be at work throughout this chapter. Where is materialism currently going? Is materialism currently dying? These two questions will of course allow me to address the problem of Marxism proper, but from the point of view of what Marxism has repressed, that is materialism itself. This strange approach to Marxism, according to which, in all Marx’s work, an official materialism would be repressing a more secret one, is defended by the late Althusser in his fascinating text from 1982: “The Underground Current of The Materialism of The Encounter.” 
	In this text, Althusser brings to light 
the existence of an almost completely unknown materialist tradition in the history of philosophy, …a materialism of the encounter, and therefore of the aleatory and of contingency. This materialism is opposed, as a wholly different mode of thought, to the various materialisms on record, including that widely ascribed to Marx, Engels, and Lenin, which, like every materialism in the rationalist tradition, is a materialism of necessity and teleology; that is to say, a transformed, disguised form of idealism.”
Such a repressed materialism is the one I intend to interrogate here: a materialism which threatens necessity, order, causality, meaning, a “dangerous” materialism, as Althusser characterizes it, a materialism — this is the central idea of the article —“which starts out from nothing.” I will constantly question this: what does starting out from nothing mean and is it possible? 
	I quote Althusser again: “to free the materialism of the encounter for this repression; to discover, if possible, its implications for both philosophy and materialism; and to ascertain its hidden effects wherever they are silently at work — such is the task that I have set myself here.”
	This task is clearly an answer to the first question: whither materialism? Where is it going? At the same time, the second question immediately appears. Is this materialism of the encounter still a materialism, Althusser asks. Is not the revelation of the repressed always the end of what is revealed? Will materialism whither in its contingent form, in the nothingness it presupposes? Will it open new paths or will it die?
	 Again, I intend to show that these two questions are of particular philosophical and political relevance and urgency for our time. 
	Now, why Darwin? The list of authors Althusser considers representative of the new materialism includes Epicurus, Machiavelli, Spinoza, Hobbes, Rousseau, Nietzsche, Heidegger, Derrida, Deleuze, a certain Marx, and Darwin. Why Darwin? Is it an arbitrary choice? It is in a way. It has to be. Contingency alone can adequately respond to contingency. So why not Darwin. And it is not, of course. The encounter between Althusser and Darwin I am risking here helps to situate the specific problem raised by the notion of the encounter itself. Both share the same vision of this strange ontological point of departure: nothingness, nothing, the same critique of teleology, the same concept of selection — thus the same materialism.
	Darwin? A materialist? Yes, indeed, according to Althusser, Darwin is a materialist of the encounter.
	Let me propose some definitions before I start the demonstration. Materialism is a name for the non-transcendental status of form in general. Matter is what forms itself in producing the conditions of possibility of this formation itself. Any transcendental instance necessarily finds itself in a position of exteriority in relation to that which it organizes. By its nature, the condition of possibility is other than what it makes possible. Materialism affirms the opposite: the absence of any outside of the process of formation. Matter’s self-formation and self-information is then systematically non transcendental.
	There are then two possibilities of explaining and understanding the origin of this immanent dynamics. Dialectical teleology is the first well known one. The formation of forms — forms of life; forms of thought, forms of society — is governed by an internal tension toward a telos, which necessarily orients and determines every self-development. This teleological vision of materialism, which has long been predominant, is precisely the one Althusser rejects here. Such a materialism presupposes that “everything is accomplished in advance; the structure precedes its elements and reproduces them in order to reproduce the structure.” It amounts in reality to a transcendental analytics, which is why Althusser may identify it with idealism. 
	Materialism of the encounter, on the contrary, doesn’t presuppose any telos, reason, or cause — such a materialism claims, again any transcendental structure, “the non-anteriority of Meaning.” From this second point of view, forms are encounters that have taken form. Althusser constantly insists on such a “form taking”, or “crystallization”: “The crystallization of the elements with one another (in the sense in which the ice crystallizes)”. Here, the formation of form has to be sought in what “gives form” to the effects of the encounter. The encounter has to “take form” and “take hold” in order to last and become necessary.
	It is while explaining this very specific type of plasticity  — the crystallisation and taking of form out of nothing — that Althusser turns toward Darwin. 
Instead of thinking contingency as a modality of necessity, (…), we must think necessity as the becoming-necessary of the encounter of contingencies. Thus we see that not only the world of life (the biologists, who should have known their Darwin, have recently become aware of this), but the world of history, too, gels at certain felicitous moments, with the taking hold of elements combined in an encounter that is apt to trace such-and-such a figure: such-and-such a species, individual, or people.”

It is precisely the passage between a species, an individual and a people that I will examine here. Are these forms equivalent? Can we transpose what happens at the level of nature to that of the political and of history?
I will first ask to what extent social selection is assimilable to natural selection as Darwin elaborates it. I will then examine the difference between a natural encounter and a social and political one. Here I ask where, in society, is the void, the nothingness, the point zero from which a form can emerge? In conclusion, I will attempt to situate Althusser’s new critique of capitalism, its impact on our philosophical time and the current emergence of new materialisms.
*   *   *
My use of the word “plasticity” a moment ago to describe the crystallisation of form in the materialism of the encounter is not entirely my decision. An attentive reading of The Origin of Species reveals that plasticity constitutes one of the central motifs of Darwin’s thought. Indeed, plasticity situates itself effectively at the heart of the theory of evolution. How does a “form” take form according to Darwin?
The concept of plasticity allows the articulation—as Darwin indicates at the beginning of his book—of a fundamental connection between the variability of individuals among the same species and the natural selection between these same individuals. 
Variability first. There is no species without it. To refer to Althusser’s terminology, variability is the “void” or “empty point” or “nothingness” from where forms can emerge. The most important characteristic of a species is its mutability; the great number of its potential morphological transformations observable in the structure of the organism is its aptitude to change forms. Contrarily to a widespread misreading of Darwin, a species is never rigid or fixed. Filiation reveals the high degree of a species’ plasticity. Considering descent, one has the impression that “the whole organization seems to have become plastic.” At the beginning of chapter five, Darwin writes, “the reproductive system is eminently susceptible to changes in the conditions of life; and to this system being functionally disturbed in the parents, I chiefly attribute the varying or plastic condition of the offspring.” Characteristic of variability, plasticity designates the quasi-infinite possibility of changes of structure authorized by the living structure itself. This quasi-infinity constitutes precisely the openness or the absence of predetermination which makes an encounter possible.
The form “takes” when variability encounters natural selection. Natural selection transforms the contingency of the former into a necessity. “I am convinced that the accumulative action of Selection... is by far the predominant Power [in the economy of mutability and variability].”
	One must therefore understand that selection guides variability and that it regulates the formation of forms. Selection allows the taking of oriented form, which obeys the natural exigency of the viability, consistency and autonomy of individuals. The plastic condition—otherwise called the motor of evolution itself—therefore hinges on plasticity understood as both the fluidity of structures on the one hand, and the selection of viable, durable forms likely to constitute a legacy or lineage on the other. The materialism of the encounter thus pertains to a natural process that assures the permanent selection and crystallization of variations.
	The relation between variation and selection raises the fundamental philosophical question I would like to address here to Althusser. In nature, the relation between variation and selection is not, properly speaking, planned. Paradoxically, natural selection appears in Darwin as a mechanism deprived of all selective intention. The best is the fittest, but aptitude is here independent of all value judgments or all actual teleology. 
	Natural selection is a-teleological, without intention. It is, again, an encounter. Insofar as it is not more than a mechanism—a term that, by definition, evokes a blind movement, the opposite or reverse of freedom—natural selection is paradoxically non-anticipatable, a promise of forms never chosen in advance, of differences to come. 
	However, and this is again, the central problem, it seems that this natural formation of forms cannot have, without disguise or misrepresentation, a social destiny. We know the errors of “social Darwinism,” which is everything but a philosophy of plasticity to the degree that it reduces down to a simple theory the struggle of the strong against the weak. For many years, particularly in France, natural selection came to be understood as a simple process of eliminating the weakest and life as a merciless struggle for power in all its forms. We may have also been able to confuse Darwinism and Malthusianism, despite precise precautions taken regarding this subject in The Origin of Species, taking natural selection as a simple quantitative dynamic governed by the ratio between the number of individuals in a population and the availability of resources. This interpretation is absolutely not Darwinian, and is, again, a misunderstanding. 
If such a misunderstanding is possible, though, is it not because a materialism of the encounter does not seem to be socially and politically sustainable, because it can only work at the level of atoms, or forms of life, never when it comes to individuals or peoples ? The automaticity and non-teleological character of natural selection seems definitively lost in social selection. Why—in the logic of exams, competitions, or in professional selection in general, the discrimination of candidates regarding aptitude functions, of competencies, or of specific technical capacities—does selection seem denied plasticity, which is to say appearing to lack fluidity on the one hand and the absence of any predetermined selective intention on the other? Why, most of the time, does social selection give the feeling of being an expected or agreed-upon process, a simple logic of conformity and reproduction, whereas natural selection is incalculably open to possibility?
Is not the materialism of the encounter always doomed to be repressed by that of teleology, anteriority of meaning, presuppositions, predeterminations?
	The plastic condition Darwin describes calls for a particular articulation of identity and difference. Identity, because individuals selected are able to reproduce and to therefore inscribe themselves into the stability of an identifiable type. Difference, because this identity is not rigid and is obtained precisely from variability. Specific identity is an identity produced by the differentiation of structures and types. However, in nature, there is an automatic and blind equilibrium between identity and difference while it seems that, in the social order, there is always a predominance of identity over difference and that the natural grace of the balance is interrupted. The idea of choice, according to an apparent paradox, is again entirely absent from natural selection. In nature, selection is unconscious. As soon as selection becomes an intention of selection, which presupposes predefined criteria, certainly programmed this time, as soon as there is no more naturality or spontaneity in the promotion, the plastic condition is menaced or even inexistent. A materialism, again, is repressing another.
The fittest is never, in nature, the one who accidentally fell upon a favourable environment for its survival. It is a matter of simply “adjust[ing] a response” to the environment, to restate it in François Jacob’s terms. Adaptation, the agreement between the environment and variation, can of course be unpredictable. There is no better “in itself.” Certainly, Darwin described natural selection as a work of perfectioning or as an “improvement,” but these notions of “better” remain without intention. Darwin was very reticent to speak of “progress;” he himself never wanted to understand his theory as a theory of “evolution,” a term that could risk suggesting a linear progress comparable to the Lamarckian law of complexification. The improvement of which Darwin speaks is not subordinated to a finalism. The form of survivors, its permanence over time, is in a certain way sculpted by the disappearance of the disadvantaged, by the return of eliminated living forms to the inorganic. As in the words of Canguilhem: “death is a blind sculptor of living forms.” The inanimate therefore becomes, negatively, the condition of sense or the project of the living. 
Could we then consider that Darwinism stops itself at the threshold of society and culture, and that all social destiny betrays it, which is to say, precisely, alters it? Selection would then be nothing other than a reproductive process of the identical. 
Can we not envision, in spite of everything, a plasticity of social condition and recover the wealth of variations and deviations of structure at the heart of culture? Is it not possible to think a social and political equilibrium in the relation between variation and selection? Where are we today with Darwin on this point?
	And where are we with Althusser? According to him, the same plasticity as the biological one should prevail in the social and political order. This is the profound meaning of his new materialism. Let’s go back to individuals and peoples.
	Althusser comes to the “taking form” of the individual when he talks about Machiavelli’s Prince. Here is the political version of the materialism of the encounter at the level of the individual: “Machiavelli (…) moves on to the idea that unification will be achieved if there emerges some nameless man… Thus the dice are tossed on the gaming table, which is itself empty.”
	So we have here this void, this absence of meaning, telos or predetermination. Form will emerge out of the encounter between fortune—that is, contingency—and the prince’s virtue — that is, his ability to select the best possibilities fortune offers, yet a selection made with no intention to do so. As if there was a naturally plastic balance between the lion and the fox, fortune and virtu.
DELETE “TO BEGIN FROM NOTHING”, insert it a little further down
Consequently, the Prince is governed, internally, by the variations of this other aleatory encounter, that of the fox on the one hand and the lion and man on the other. This encounter may not take place, but it may also take place. It has to last long enough for the figure of the Prince to 'take hold' among the people - to 'take hold', that is, to take form, so that, institutionally, he instils the fear of himself as good; and, if possible, so that he ultimately is good, but on the absolute condition that he never forget how to be evil if need be.
But how can there exist, in the social, such a nameless man, able to “begin from nothing”, such  a nameless place, such a non-teleological formation of forms?
	The problem becomes all the more urgent when Althusser comes to the people or community via Rousseau. The specific political issue Rousseau is raising is the following: to the extent that men have been “forced to have encounters” when they were in the state of nature, forced into the social, is it possible to transform this imposed and illegitimate state of things into a legitimate one? That is, is it possible to recreate the conditions for a contingent and non-teleological form of encounter once the encounter has already taken place? To plasticize it retrospectively in some way? “To rectif[y] an illegitimate (the prevailing) form, transforming it into a legitimate form”?  Such is, according to Althusser, the leading question of The Social Contract.
The most profound thing in Rousseau is doubtless disclosed and covered back up [decouvert et recouvert] here, in this vision of any possible theory of history, which thinks the contingency of necessity as an effect of the necessity of contingency, an unsettling pair of concepts that must nevertheless be taken into account.
Again, where is the void, the empty square from where we can start undertaking such a shift? “It is in the political void that the encounter must come about,” Althusser writes. But where is it and what can it be?
*  *  *
	There seems to be no void in our societies. Let’s have a look at the process of social selection—understood, for example, as the sorting and choosing of capacities or special aptitudes within the framework of examinations, contests, or recruitment interviews—which immediately appears as the antonym to the plastic condition that presides over the economy of natural selection and its non-signifying sense. 
	The catalogue of tasks, the outline of jobs, the protocol of exams always precede the real encounter with the variability and diversity of candidates, thus preventing differences from emerging by themselves. Such selection cannot, in fact, consist in the production of differences but, instead, only in the perpetuation of the criteria through which one chooses them. It is not the best that are selected, or even those that exhibit an astonishing capacity for adaptation, but those who are the most conformable. Agreement takes precedence over value. Ensuring the perpetuation and renewability of the identical, social selection therefore ensures the return of sociological heaviness, never the emergence of singularities out of nothing. 
	Marx, particularly in his Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right, was the first thinker to have denounced the conservative characteristic of the social selection of aptitudes. Taking the example of “functionaries,” Marx shows that one expects of them no special competence beyond that which consists in perpetrating the established order. Hegel writes in his Elements of the Philosophy of Right that these “individuals are not destined by birth of personal nature to hold a particular office, for there is no natural or immediate link between the two. The objective moment in their vocation is knowledge and proof of ability.” However these capabilities, says Marx, are not capabilities; no “technique” is necessary to become a functionary, no specific expertise except for the talent of obedience, of respect for the State and therefore of conformism. 
Another critique of social selection would be conducted in the work of Pierre Bourdieu, notably in the famous text, The Inheritors, which he co-authored with Jean-Claude Passeron in 1964 concerning the class trajectory of students. Selection norms, always defined in advance, constitute a veritable program and coincide, again, with pure and simple values of conformity, those of the dominant class, that fix the criteria of “cultural legitimacy.” The principal characteristic of this legitimacy is to be a dissimulated social authority. This is the function of social reproduction of cultural reproduction, founded upon “privilege”—by definition the most predetermined selective criterion ever. 
Social selection has the goal of reproducing order, privilege, or the dominant ideology. One never selects the aptitude for action or political struggle, for example, but always aptitudes that respect order. Who among us has never been shocked by the injustice of this sorting [tri], which only retains those individuals most compliant, never the most singular, and which, finally, elects so many mediocre, incompetent and narrow minds? Who has never had the feeling that social selection was, in effect, a program and never a promise, and that the morphological transformations of society were, deep down, only agents of conservation? 
The question that arises then is whether the destiny of social selection is a fatality; or if selection could, in the political realm, join in any way the natural plastic condition. How can we ensure, within the realm of community and culture, the equilibrium between variation and selection, the future of difference, the promise of unexpected forms? 
* * *
Althusser is in reality perfectly aware of these difficulties, of the discrepancy between the encounter in the ontological or natural order, and the encounter in the political realm. There would have to be only one solution to this: to know that criteria do not pre-exist selection itself. In society, such would be the recovered plastic condition. The whole problem always concerns knowing how not to identify the difference in advance, since selection in the order is always an act that confers value, and therefore creates hierarchies and norms. How must one think at once the evaluating character inevitable to all social selection and its possible indetermination or liberty? 
The only philosopher to have clearly posed this question is Nietzsche, and that is why Althusser refers to him after dealing with Machiavelli and Rousseau. It is certainly not for him to condemn selection, for the latter is inevitable, and it has an ontological foundation: becoming is itself nothing other than selection. Do not forget the following saying by Heraclitus: “For even the best of them choose one thing above all others, immortal glory among mortals, while most of them are glutted like beasts.” Becoming is so rich in differences that it can only occur upon the mode of choice. The task of philosophy is essentially selective since it chooses the differences opened by the flux of life, sorts them, and interprets them. In Ecce Homo, Nietzsche asks, “What is it, fundamentally, that allows us to recognize who has turned out well?” Which could be translated as “who has taken form”?
In Difference and Repetition, Deleuze, to whom Althusser is also referring, shows that selection produces its own criteria as it operates. It therefore becomes sensitive to the validity and viability of differences. The difference will be selected, as it unfolds, demonstrating its aptitude for return, which is to say the possibility of engendering a heritage or tradition. Thereby “good” music, for example, engenders the tradition of its interpretations, a great text the lineage of its readers. Selection should therefore happen after the emergence or springing of difference, in the same manner that variability precedes natural selection.
Althusser perfectly knows that the “political void” in which the “encounter must come about,” this political void which is also, as he says, “a philosophical void,” may not exist; if we could be certain of its existence, if we were able to know in advance, the encounter would never take place, and we would fall back into teleology again. The determination of this void of nothingness, of this point of possibility which opens all promise of justice, equality, legitimacy cannot be presupposed, and cannot be as blindly and automatically regulated as in nature either. It has to be made possible. This is the philosophical task which appears with the end of the repressed materialism.
Machiavelli’s Prince is, Althusser says, “a man of nothing who has started out of nothing starting out from an unassignable place.” To find and give form to this unassignable place is what we have to do. Unassignable is the translation of the French inassignable, but I am not sure that the word has the same meaning in both languages. In French, it means indeterminate and infinite. In English, it means incapable of being repudiated or transferred to another, inalienable. But I also found “unassigned: not allocated or set aside for a specific purpose”. The English is then much more interesting because it opens a space within the idea of a proper, something which cannot be attributed to someone else, which cannot be denied without destroying the subject, and what belongs to no one, and has no destination. We can call this place, the unassignable place, the properly anonymous. Without qualities, without privilege, without legacies, without tradition. People of nothing, people of valour. From there, and from there only, can new forms emerge, singular, unpredictable, unseen, regenerating, Althusser also says. 
Before I ask a few questions about this “place,” let me evoke, to bring this presentation to a close, the changes caused by this new materialism in Althusser’s reading of Marx, and consequently in his critique of capitalism. In the light of this new materialism, Marx, Althusser writes, “was constrained to think within a horizon torn between the aleatory of the Encounter and the necessity of Revolution.” Hence, all his disavowals, debarments and philosophical betrayals. Very briefly: 
In innumerable passages, Marx…explains that the capitalist mode of production arose from the ‘encounter’ between ‘the owners of money’ and the proletarian stripped of everything but his labour-power. ‘It so happens that this encounter took place, and ‘took hold’, which means that it…lasted, and became an accomplished fact,…inducing stable relationships and laws…: the laws of development of the capitalist mode of production... 
So initially, Marx analyses the constitution of capitalism as an encounter starting from the plastic void, the nothingness of the proletariat — its fundamental dispossession. But instead of remaining faithful to this vision, to the vision of a mode of production as a form taking form out of nothing, aggregating different elements and becoming gradually necessary, Marx and Engels have inverted the process. They eventually affirmed that the different elements constitutive of the encounter “were from all eternity destined to enter into combination, harmonize with one another, and reciprocally produce each other as their own ends, conditions and or complements.” They substitute an analysis of the reproduction of the proletariat instead for its production. 
When Marx and Engels say that the proletariat is ‘the product of big industry,’ they utter a very great piece of nonsense, positioning themselves within the logic of the accomplished fact of the reproduction of the proletariat on an extended scale, not the aleatory logic of the ‘encounter’ which produces (rather than reproduces), as the proletariat, this mass of impoverished, expropriated human beings as one of the elements making up the mode of production. In the process, Marx and Engels shift from the first conception of the mode of production, an historico-aleatory conception, to a second, which is essentialistic and philosophical.

So again, the task is to free the repressed philosophical status of impoverishment, expropriation, dispossession, nothingness as the origin of any formative process. Poverty, dispossession, exploitation are the points of departure of philosophical thinking, not because they would constitute objects or topics for philosophers, but because practice and theory both owe their energy, the power of their dynamism to their originary absence of determinate being. The same originary “virgin forest,” Althusser says.
“The Underground Current of the Materialism of the Encounter” is no doubt a surprisingly anticipative text. The attempt at clearing a point of void, nothingness and dispossession is at the heart of the most important current philosophical trends, which define themselves as materialisms. Speculative realism for example, in its search for a non-correlationist mode of thinking, elaborates a notion of an absolute which would be not “ours,” which would remain indifferent to us.
Opening the unassignable place in a global world, where every place is assigned, has become the most urgent ethical and political task. The problem is to succeed in not constituting it as a transcendental structure, and this is what I am struggling with myself, trying to disengage my plasticity from any symbolic grip, and attempting to constantly empty it from its own sovereignty.
All this is extremely fragile; the waves are constantly, repeatedly, covering up the “open fields” of singularity, surprise, non-anticipatable selection, recognition of aptitudes, the capacity to welcome new forms without expecting them. The waves of ownership, appropriation, reproduction, are constantly and repeatedly covering up the originary deprivation of ontological wealth.
	Whither materialism? The question won’t ever loose its ambiguity. But as Darwin says, when considering the changing nature of species, one at times has the impression that the “whole organization seems to have become plastic.” Let’s live for those times.
￼ Jacques Derrida, Specters of Marx: State of the Debt, the Work of Mourning and the New International (Routledge, 1994).￼ Ibid., xiii.￼ This chapter was first given as a presentation under the auspices of The Centre for Research in Modern European Philosophy (CRMEP) and the London Graduate School of Kingston University London in May, 2013.￼ Louis Althusser, “The Underground Current of the Materialism of the Encounter,” in Philosophy of the Encounter: Later Writings, 1978-87, ed. François Matheron and Olivier Corpet (London: Verso, 2006), 163–207.￼ Ibid., 167, 8.￼ Ibid., 168.￼ Ibid., 189.￼ Ibid., 168.￼ Ibid., 200.￼ Ibid., 169.￼ Ibid., 170.￼ Ibid., 194.￼ Charles Darwin, On The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, Or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life, 2nd ed. (London: John Murray, 1860), 12, http://www.gutenberg.org/files/22764/22764-h/22764-h.htm.￼ Ibid., 131, 132.￼ Ibid., 43.￼ On the relationship with Malthus, see the conclusion to The Origin of Species.￼ François Jacob, The Logic of Life : a History of Heredity (New York: Pantheon Books, 1973), 8.￼ Georges Canguilhem, A Vital Rationalist: Selected Writings from Georges Canguilhem (New York: Zone Books, 1994), 212.￼ Althusser, “The Underground Current of the Materialism of the Encounter,” 172.￼ Ibid., 173.￼ Ibid., 185.￼ Ibid., 187.￼ Ibid.￼ Ibid., 173.￼ Karl Marx, Critique of Hegel’s “Philosophy Of Right” (CUP Archive, 1977), 21 and ff.￼ Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Elements of the Philosophy of Right, ed. Allen W Wood, trans. Hugh Barr Nisbet (Cambridge [England]; New York: Cambridge University Press, 1991), 332.￼ Pierre Bourdieu and Jean Claude Passeron, The Inheritors : French Students and Their Relation to Culture (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979).￼ Fragment 29.￼ Friedrich Nietzsche, On the Genealogy of Morals and Ecce Homo (Random House LLC, 2010), 224.￼ Gilles Deleuze, Difference and Repetition (New York: Columbia University Press, 1994), 300.￼ Althusser, “The Underground Current of the Materialism of the Encounter,” 172.￼ Ibid., 174.￼ Ibid., 172.￼ Ibid., 187.￼ Ibid., 197.￼ Ibid., 200.￼ Ibid., 198.￼ Ibid., 191.￼ Ibid.￼ Darwin, On The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, Or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life, 12.